# Kickstarter-projects
End-to-end machine learning project

### Project Description and Objective ###
Kickstarter is a crowd funding platform that allows individuals to get funding for their creative projects. From arts, to film and technology, any project with a clear goal and business proposal will be accepted. The platform facilitates the realization of extraordinary ideas supported by “backers” offering financial support and pledge money under an “all or nothing” principle where if the funding goal is not met in due time, the project will be labeled as “failed”.

The objective of this project was to develop three machine learning models that would respectively predict amount pledged, classify whether the project would be successful or not, and use clustering techniques to gain insights of the different types of projects. 

### Building the models ###
The first step towards building three strong models was data preprocessing, feature engineering and anomaly detection. Feature engineering included the simplification of categorical variables such as countries and categories and the addition of a new continuous variable, goal in USD, which is derived from a conversion of the initial goal using the currency rate of the projects.  Anomalies were detected and removed using Isolation Forest, with a contamination rate of 0.01. 

#### First model - regression ####
The first model that was developed was a regression model which aims to predict the value of pledged money in USD. From a business perspective, this model would be useful to give insights to the project creators on whether their project will reach their goal or not – potentially allowing them to make adjustments to their projects before the launch, and thereby increasing their chances of getting the funds necessary for their project to be successful.  For this model, any feature of a project that would be established after the launch were not included, for instance, backers count, amount pledged, staff pick, and spotlight were excluded as predictors. 

Principal component analysis was used as a correlation analysis technique to ensure that correlated features were removed to prevent multicollinearity issues.  For instance, only one of launched at month and created at month predictors was included in the model. Furthermore, feature selection techniques such as Lasso and Random forest regressor were useful in identifying and ranking relevant predictors. After testing an array of regression models, the Gradient Boosting Regressor model was identified as the best performing model in terms of stability and based on cross validation. The MSE of the trained GB regressor was 8.472 billion. 

#### Second model - classification ####
The second model that was developed was a classification model which aims to predict whether the variable state will take the value of “successful” or “failure” for each project. Excluded predictors were very similar to the regression model as the prediction had to be made at the time each project is launched. From a business perspective this model can give insight to the project creators whether their project is at risk of failure could be used to flag projects that are ‘prone to failure’. Kickstarter could monitor the latter projects and warn creators if their project will be a failure while allowing creators them make necessary modifications to ensure success, thus potentially increasing the overall rate of success of all projects launched on the platform. Similarly, to the regression model, feature selection techniques and correlation detection was used to ensure that uncorrelated and relevant features were included in the classification model. The gradient boosting classifier model performed the most successfully at the classification task against other tested models such as Logistic regression, MLP classifier (ANN), and Decision tree classifier. With fined tune parameters and after performing cross validation, the accuracy for the training model was of 73.7% with a precision of 64.9% and a recall of 43.7%.


#### Third model - clustering ####
The last model, a clustering model, allows for clustering of projects which are similar. Unlike the regression and clustering models, features determined post-launch were included in the clustering analysis. Insights gained from feature importance for the first two models as well as variance analysis and PCA narrowed the predictors down to goal in USD, backers count, year of launch and spotlight. Based on the elbow method results, the optimal number of clusters was determined to be 6 and the best performing model was KMeans, with an average silhouette score of 0.527 and cluster scores ranging from 0.28 to 0.58. Using a snake plot to visualize the standardized average goals in USD and backers count allows for better interpretation of the two features for each cluster. We can see that cluster 1 and 6 have considerably lower goals and have less backers, compared to 5 which has projects with many backers. Cluster 3 has projects with very large goals but with few backers, with a high rate of failed projects, even if these projects were 96% spotlight projects. Looking at cluster 4, we can see that projects with lower goals and an average amount of backers that were in the majority released between 2014-2015 (61%) tend to be more successful projects, regardless if they were spotlight projects. Cluster 6 counted projects released in the debuts of Kickstarter (2009-2013) tend to have a lower number of backers, which seems logical as it correlates with the popularity of the platform at the time. 
